# S3

- Object storage
  - S3 provides secure, durable, highly scalable object storage
- Scalable
  - S3 allows you to store and retrieve any amount of data from anywhere on the web at low cost
- Simple
  - S3 is easy to use with a simple web service interface

S3 is object-based storage - Manages data as objects rather than in file systems or data blocks:
- Upload any file type
- Examples include photos, videos, code, documents and text files
- Cannot be used to run an operation system or database
- Unlimited storage, with maximum file size of 5TB
- Files are stored in S3 buckets (similar to a folders)
- Universal namespace
  - All AWS accounts share the S3 namespace
  - Each S3 bucket name is globabally unique
- Example S3 URLs
  - https://`bucket-name`.s3.region.amazonaws.com/`key-name`
  - https://`acloudguru`.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/`ralphie.jpg`

Key value store:
- Key: The name of the object e.g. `ralphie.jpg`
- Value: the data itself, which is made up of a sequence of bytes
- Version ID: Important for storing multiple versions of the same object
- Metadata: Data about the data you are storing e.g. content-type, last-modified etc.

S3 is a safe place to store files - The data is spread across multiple devices and facilities to ensure availability and durability:
- Availability: 99.95% to 99.99% service availability
- Durability: 99.999999999% durability i.e. essentially you will never lose your data

Securing your data:
- Server-side encryption
  - You can set default encryption on a bucket to encrypt all new objects when they are stored in the bucket
- Access control lists (ACLs)
  - Define which AWS accounts or groups are granted access and the type of access
  - You can attach S3 ACLs to individual objects with a bucket; so these work on an individual object level
- Bucket policies
  - S3 bucket policies specify what actions are allowed/denied e.g. allow Alice to `PUT` but not `DELETE` objects in the bucket

Read-After-Write consistency
- After a successful write of a new object (`PUT`) or an overwrite of an existing object, any subsequent read request immediately receives the latest version of the object
- Strong consistency for list operations, so after a write, you can immediately perform a listing of the objects in a bucket with all changes reflected

## Hosting static website using S3

You can use S3 to host `static` websites such as `.html` sites.
Dynamic websites, such as those that require database connections, cannot be hosted on S3.

S3 scales automatically to meet demand.
Many enterprises will put static websites on S3 when they think there is going to be a large number of requests e.g. a movie preview.

An example of seeing a public static website on S3 in action is under [\<project root\>/terraform/s3](../terraform/s3)

## Versioning

- All versions
  - All versions of an object are stored in S3. This includes all writes and even if you delete an object.
- Backup
  - Can be a great backup tool.
- Cannot be disabled
  - Once enabled, versioning cannot be disabled, only suspended.
- Lifecycle rules
  - Can be integrated with lifecycle rules.
- Supports MFA
  - Can support multi-factor authentication.

With versioning we can safely delete an object.
When we delete an object, it will be marked with a `delete marker`, and in order to restore, we simply delete the `delete marker`.

## Storage classes

- S3 Standard
  - Default storage class, suitable for websites, content distribution, mobile and gaming applications, big data analytics
  - High availability and durability
  - Data is stored redundantly across multiple devices in multiple facilities (>= 3 AZs)
  - 99.99% availability and 99.999999999% durability
  - Designed for frequent access
- S3 Standard Infrequent Access (S3 Standard IA)
  - Rapid access: Used for data that is accessed less frequently but requires rapid access when needed.
  - You pay to access the data
    - There is a low per-GB storage price and a per-GB retrieval fee.
  - Use cases
    - Great for long term storage, backups and as a data store for disaster recovery files.
  - 99.9% availability
  - 99.999999999% durability
- S3 One Zone Infrequent Access
  - Like S3 Standard IA but data is stored redundantly within a single AZ.
  - Costs 20% less than regular S3 Standard IA.
  - Great for long lived infrequently accessed non-critical data.
  - 99.5% availability
  - 99.999999999% durability
- Glacier
  - This is cheap storage.
  - Optimised for data that is very infrequently accessed.
  - You pay each time you access your data.
  - Use only for archiving data.
  - Option 1: Glacier
    - Provides long term data archiving with retrieval times that range from 1 minute to 12 hours e.g. historical data only accessed a few times a year.
  - Option 2: Glacier Deep Archive
    - Archiving rarely accessed data with a default retrieval time of 12 hours e.g. financial records that may be accessed once or twice per year.
  - 99.99% availability
  - 99.999999999% durability
- S3 Intelligent Tiering
  - What if you don't know whether you will be accessing your data frequently or infrequently, and of course they may change over time?
  - Intelligent tiering automatically moves your data to the most cost-effective tier based on how fequently you access each object.
  - This is done via Machine Learning.
  - 99.9% availability
  - 99.999999999% durability

## Lifecyle management with S3

What is lifecyle management?
It automates moving your objects between the different storage tiers, thereby maximising cost effectiveness:

```prettier
S3 Standard         ------------>      S3 IA        ------------>     Glacier
Keep for 30 days                    After 30 days                   After 90 days
```

You can use lifecycle management to move different versions of objects to different storage tiers.

## S3 Object lock and Glacier vault lock

- S3 Object Lock:
  - You can use S3 Object Lock to store objects using a `write once, read many (WORM)` model.
    It can help prevent objects from being deleted or modified for a fixed amount of time or indefinitely.
  - You can use S3 Object Lock to meet regulatory requirements that require WORM storage, or add an extra layer of protection against object changes and deletion.
  - Object Locks can be on individual objects or applied across the bucket as a whole.
  - 2 different modes for S3 Object Lock:
    - Governance mode:
      - Users cannot overwrite or delete an object version or alter its lock settings unless they have special permissions.
    - Compliance mode:
      - A protected object version cannot be overwritten or deleted by any user, including the root user in your AWS account.
  - Retention periods:
    - Protects an object version for a fixed amount of time.
      When you place a retention period on an object version, S3 stores a timestamp in the object version's metadata.
  - Legal holds:
    - S3 Object Lock also enables you to place a legal hold on an object version.
      Like a retention period, a legal hold prevents an object version from being overwritten or deleted.
      However, a legal hold doesn't have an associated retention period and remains in effect until removed by any user who has `s3:PutObjectLegalHold` permission.

- Glacier Vault Lock:
  - Allows you to deploy and enforce compliance controls for individual S3 Glacier vaults with a vault lock policy.
  - Essentially apply a WORM model to Glacier.

## Encrypting S3 objects

- 3 types of encryption:
  - Encryption in transit
    - SSL/TLS
    - HTTPS
  - Encryption at rest - Server side encryption, 3 types which are:
    - SSE-S3: S3 managed keys using AES 256 bit encryption
    - SSE-KMS: AWS key management service
    - SSE-C: Customer provided keys
    - Then there are two ways to enforce server-side encryption:
      - Console: Select the ecryption setting on your S3 bucket (a checkbox)
      - Bucket policy: You can enforce encryption using a bucket policy e.g. deny any `PUT` of a file upload request that does not include the header `x-amz-server-side-encryption`
  - Encryption at rest - Client side encryption:
    - You encrypt the files yourself before you upload them to S3